Good morning.
My name is Julio González.
I'm the manager of the
talk group at Apple.
Today, I want to give you a bird's-eye
view of the Text system in Mac OS X.
It's going to be great for
you if you're new to Mac OS X,
but I'll also mention some
of the new features that we
have in Text in Snow Leopard.
I will talk,
I will try to just touch on the
APIs that you would commonly use
and areas that might interest you.
I will not go into very deep details
in each one of the Text systems,
otherwise this could take far too long.
I'll also point out some of the
pitfalls that you might run into
and some special catches when
you deal with the Text system.
I'll also talk about fonts.
There are many ways that our users
have to install fonts in the system
and when to make them available.
And there are some gotchas, too,
that you might fall into when
you're dealing with fonts.
So, up on the slide,
we have all the major text
subsystems in Mac OS X.
I want to point out to you that if you
go on the online text documentation,
or you pick up your favorite book
and programming map for Mac OS X,
you're going to see other text
or systems that deal with text.
I strongly encourage you
to stay away from those.
You have no need to get into those to
write a successful Mac OS X application.
So, the bottom layer is Quartz.
Quartz is our glyph rendering engine.
The middle sits Core Text.
Core Text does all the
font file management,
font access,
and Unicode text layout for the system.
And on top sits Cocoa.
Cocoa is the whole package.
If you're dealing with text,
this is where you want to be.
It covers input, covers layout,
covers everything.
It can handle everything
automatically for you,
or it's highly customized.
possible.
Now fonts.
OS X ships with a large amount of,
or collection of fonts.
Over 100 font families
and 200 font faces.
This allows us to support the major
writing systems and major languages.
And we support all the
major font formats:
TrueType, PostScript, OpenType,
and some legacy font formats as well.
Now, in OS X, users, as I said before,
have many ways to install
fonts in the system.
And this is something you,
as a developer, need to be aware of.
Because if you deal with
fonts in your application,
and you have some sort of
font menu that you handle,
you need to be aware that the
font set that your application
starts with is not static.
The user may change this at any time.
The most common ways for users to
make fonts available to the system
is to install them in one of the
known font locations to the system.
At the bottom is the
system font location.
This location is for fonts
that are fundamental to the OS.
We strongly discourage any applications
to install fonts here or for the users
to install fonts in this location,
and especially not remove them.
The next location is the local location,
library fonts,
and these fonts are also available
to everybody in the system and
every process of the system.
The difference is that this is the
location where we encourage you as an
application developer to install fonts
that users will use for content creation.
So it's not only available to your apps,
but it's also available to
other apps that might need
the font for their content.
Next is the network location.
And typically this location is only
available to those users that are in
a network file system whose network
administrator has enabled this location.
These fonts are available to everybody,
everybody who has access to
the network and every process
that is actively using it.
Finally, there is the user location.
It's in your home
directory library fonts.
And this is the location where users
would install fonts that they purchase or
that otherwise acquire for personal use.
Now, you as an application developer
might want to install fonts in
this location if you know that
you're dealing with a setting,
say a university setting,
where many users will be sharing the
computer and your font licenses for your
applications do not cover multiple users.
One thing to note about these locations.
If, as part of your application
or as sort of your bundle,
you have what we call a daemon process,
a process that runs outside
of the user session,
those processes do not have
access to all the fonts.
They only have access to the
system and to the local fonts.
You won't have access to the user fonts.
Now, if you have a background process
that's what we call an agent,
runs within the user session,
you have the same fonts,
access to the same fonts that
the rest of the processes do.
Another way for users to install fonts
is to use font management applications.
Typically, users of these applications
will create sets or libraries
of fonts that they enable or
register and unregister on demand.
OS X ships with such an application.
It's called FontBook.
But there are many third-party
applications that have actually an
enhanced set or have more features than
FontBook does and do a good job at it.
Applications may install
their own fonts as well.
There are APIs that I'll
show you later that allow the
application to register fonts.
They can even register them
privately so that it cannot be
seen by the rest of the system.
I'll show you an example of that.
And finally, fonts may be auto-activated
on the user's behalf.
This is something that has been present
in the OS for many releases now.
And it was only enabled if you use a
third-party font management application.
Starting with Snow Leopard,
this is on by default.
So the way it works,
if Spotlight can find a font
file in one of your disks,
it will be made available
to any application or
document that requests this.
So,
before we get into the text architecture,
let's just get some
fundamentals out of the way.
Before we can draw text on the screen,
we need fonts.
And fonts,
from a high-level point of view,
is basically a collection of
glyphs that same as similar
design pattern or purpose.
A glyph is a graphical
representation of a character.
So, typically the simple fonts
have one glyph per character,
typically Western fonts.
But, that's not to say that the
more complex modern fonts can't
have multiple representations.
Up on the slide, we have Zapfino,
and you can see that it has multiple
glyphs with the capital letter A.
Now, fonts supporting complex
writing systems such as Arabic,
it's a must that they have multiple
glyphs that represent a single character.
Now,
what are the fundamental font types that
you're going to be dealing with OS X?
Up on the slide, we have them.
We have on the top the Cocoa font types
and the bottom the Core Text font types.
I must warn you again,
if you go to the online documentation
or you pick up your favorite
book on programming for OS X,
you will see other font types.
Stay away from those.
They're just for legacy.
You don't need them to program in OS X.
So, first let's start with the font.
By the way, these fonts,
the Cocoa fonts and the Core Text fonts,
are what we call toll-free bridge.
So,
you can interchange them in either layer.
So, let's start with the font.
A font is a concrete font reference,
a strike, if you will,
into the font family.
So,
the font is what you will use when you
need to draw something on the screen.
It's what you will use
if you need to get,
say, glyph information.
You need to get font metrics information.
You need to get some glyphs.
You need to get some character mappings.
That's the reference that you will use.
A font descriptor is a way for you to
establish what font you want to use.
It is sort of an abstract
representation of a font.
If you come from the Windows world,
it's akin to a log font.
So, you specify a bunch of
attributes that best describe
the font that we want to use,
that you want to use,
and the system will get that for you.
Mac OS X is built entirely using Unicode.
The fundamental type to represent
Unicode on Mac OS X is using the string.
CFString if you're using Core Foundation,
NSString if you're using Cocoa.
And there are many ways that
you can create the strings.
You can create them
directly by using Unicode,
UTF-8, 16, 32.
You can create the strings using
some of the standard encodings.
There are conversion APIs that
NSString provides for you to use those.
And also,
there are APIs given to you so that if
you're dealing with an external file
system or I should say you're dealing
with another file system or architecture,
you don't need to worry about things
such as byte order mark or decomposition.
The APIs will handle this for you.
Now, our Core Text engine and
Cocoa Text engines use a higher
level construct to operate.
And that's the attributed string.
The attributed string is
basically the base string,
the Unicode string for
all intents and purposes,
and a set of attributes that define
what you want to do on that string.
Think of it as a rich
text representation.
The neat thing is if
you're at the Cocoa layer,
you can have a set of APIs that
allow you to construct the strings
from standard font documents,
such as HTML,
or I should say file formats, etc.
And finally,
typically if you are a good programmer,
a good citizen,
you're not going to be hard coding
strings into your application.
You're going to be dealing
with some form of strings file,
some sort of resource strings
that can be localized.
So, let's talk about the core code.
So, let's get into the text architecture.
At the very bottom is Quartz.
Quartz, as I said,
is a glyph rendering engine.
It has no idea about doing text layout.
What it does is to layout glyphs.
So, if that's the case,
why should you use Quartz at all?
And by the way,
you might catch me as lip-syncing.
Core graphics is the
same thing as Quartz.
Anyhow.
You might have some valid
reasons for using Quartz,
and that is if you have a very
specialized text layout engine,
you're working outside of the norm,
you're not handling Unicode.
You might want to be in this space.
You have a set of code from many,
many years ago where
you control everything.
You can then be at the
Quartz level if you need to.
Another reason might be speed.
You are at the lowest level
of the text architecture.
You want to have that speed.
There might be reasons to be in Quartz.
Now, I must warn you,
both Core Text and Cocoa are
highly optimized for speed.
So unless you want to take
some of the shortcuts that I'll
mention in the next few slides,
that speed that you might gain
by using Quartz might not be
necessarily what you want.
Now, seriously, why shouldn't you use it?
Well, most of your users are not going
to be feeding glyphs to you.
You're going to be dealing with text,
and typically Unicode.
So Quartz has no idea about
how to deal with Unicode text.
It has no idea how to do layout.
It just knows how to deal with glyphs.
Finally, it has no knowledge on how
to do font substitution.
If you're dealing with a
font and it can't render one
of the glyphs that you need,
you'll just guess a box for that glyph.
So, given that,
here are some of the APIs that
you can use at the Quartz level.
This first one, CGContextShowTextAtPoint,
is sort of a deceiving API.
You see this API and you say, "Oh,
I can be drawing text
using Quartz." Well,
if you take note of the fourth parameter,
it's a char string.
It's not a unichar string.
What it knows how to do is
draw basically ASCII text.
And, as I'll show you later,
it won't even do a good job at that.
But now, if you are dealing with...
You have full knowledge of fonts
and how to get glyphs out of fonts.
There are some APIs that you
can use to lay out your text,
and here are two APIs that
you can use to do that.
So,
let me give you some examples of trying
to use Quartz for text rendering.
Here up on the screen,
I have a simple example of drawing the
word waffle using two different fonts.
On the top, we have what happens when
you draw it with Quartz,
and in the bottom,
what happens when you draw
it with Core Text and Cocoa.
First thing I want to show
you is Quartz has no idea how
to properly do any kerning.
So, you can see how much nicer it
looks when you draw it with Quartz.
Next thing is Quartz, once again,
has no idea how to deal with ligatures.
So, both of these fonts
have the FFL ligature,
and you can see how much nicer
it looks using Quartz and Cocoa.
This is the way the font designer
intended the text to look.
Now,
you could say both kerning and ligatures
are fancy typographical features.
I really don't need it.
I want to have all the speed that
I can monster for my application.
Well, let me give you an example
where that doesn't apply.
Here I have a French string and
an Arabic string that I'm going
to use two fonts to draw it with.
And the first thing you'll notice
is how Quartz doesn't know how
to properly place the accent
on top of the capital letter E.
Now, you could say,
"I can live with that." Well,
if you're dealing with a complex
writing system such as Arabic,
you can see how horrendously
Core Graphics or Quartz
does to handle this text.
You can notice that it doesn't
apply the necessary ligatures.
And not only that,
if you know how to read Arabic,
you will notice that those glyphs
are not ordered in the right way.
They're not ordered right to left.
Another thing that I want you
to take a cue from this slide is
that I cheated using this slide.
If you notice,
I didn't write it in the right order.
I didn't use the show text at point API.
I used the show glyphs at point API.
So how did I get those glyphs?
I had to go up to Quartz to get those
glyphs to be able to render with them.
Finally,
here's a sample of font substitution.
Typically, as a developer,
you're going to be given a stream
of Unicode or text to render.
You have no idea what font will
be able to handle that text.
So you say,
"I'll just pick the system font,
Lucida Grunt,
to draw it." And you can see what
Quartz does and what Core Text does.
Quartz has no idea where
to get the Arabic glyphs.
Lucida doesn't have it.
Whereas, Core Text and Cocoa apply the
necessary font substitution.
Now, you still say, I still want to use
Quartz for my rendering.
I've got my own layout engine.
Quartz does provide some ways
for you to access font data,
so you can get at the glyphs,
get at the metrics.
So up on the slide,
I have some of the APIs,
sample of the APIs that
you can find in Quartz.
There are more in
Quartz that you can use.
The only thing that I want to warn you
is that these APIs are workable only
for a subset of the formats out there.
They work for TrueType fonts.
They will not work for PostScript fonts.
You would need to know
how to parse those.
And even in the case of TrueType,
even though it gives you
access to the font data,
you still need to know how
to parse that font data.
There's no APIs that will
interpret that data for you.
If you want to be in that
space or not have to do that,
this is where you want to be.
You want to be in Core Text.
Core Text, like I said before,
it provides all the font
management for the system.
It provides font access.
It not only handles all
the font formats out there,
but it provides APIs that let you get
at the font data and APIs that actually
interpret the font data for you.
And finally, it gives you access to,
or it has capabilities of
doing Unicode text layout.
It's our base Unicode text
layout engine for the system.
So.
Before we start drawing text,
we need to have a font.
And here is how you can create
a font to use with Core Text.
Fonts are specific instances,
and if you must create one directly,
what you need to pass to the
font APIs is a PostScript name.
Note, do not pass a family name.
That's a performance degradation.
The other thing that you need to know
is please pass a proper PostScript name.
Font names are case sensitive.
If you pass the wrong font name,
the system is going to try very hard
to find that font in the system.
Typically,
when you are dealing with font instances,
you're in the space of your UI.
Core Text has a nice API,
the Create UI Font for Language API,
which allows you to create a font for any
element in the UI that you might need.
So the first parameter it takes
is the element you can get.
You can pass a font for a button,
give me the font for a button,
for drawing a label,
for placing in a menu.
This API will return the
exact font that you will need
to use for your application.
The last parameter is the language.
Typically, you pass "no" saying,
saying I wanna use the default
language the user is using.
And then, if you know exactly the
font that you want to use,
this is a way that you
can use it or create it.
You create with name and
pass it a PostScript name.
And lastly, I have an example of another
API that allows you to convert
from one face to another.
In this case,
we're converting from the bold face
that we had before to an italic face.
Now, font descriptors.
This is the recommended way that we
have for you to create font references.
Once again, these are references that
are abstract in nature.
You can create a font
reference that says,
"Give me a font.
Give me any, say,
italic font in the system.
That's all I need." Or you can
create a font reference that says,
you know, it's very specific.
You specify a family name, a weight,
compression ratio, color,
any number of attributes,
and the system will provide the
best matching font for you to use.
Now, given that,
this is a recommended way that
we provide for you to store font
references in your documents.
Given that we create a font
reference from a list of attributes,
this list of attributes can be
serialized into your documents as well.
And I'll show you an example.
I'll show you an example of that later.
And finally, font substitution is -- you
get for free with Core Text.
It's on by default.
But if you need to override it,
there are ways for you to override it.
And one way to do it is to pass your own
font substitution list or cascade list,
as we call it, to the descriptor to
override the system behavior.
So here's an example of -- or the
recommended examples that we have
for you to create font references.
If you have a PostScript name,
you can use the first API and
you pass it a PostScript name,
and it will give you that exact
font descriptor reference.
But most of the time,
new developers are dealing with
font family names and weights.
This is very typical in the
CSS web space and also typical
for developers that present ways
to select fonts by their users.
They typically use a
family name and a weight.
So this is the way we recommend
that you create your font reference.
Don't try to create a direct font
reference using a family name.
Create a font descriptor
using an attribute,
and the attribute is a dictionary
basically stating what you need.
And the two attributes that
you need are the family name
attribute and the face attribute.
So, up here on the screen is a
more abstract example of how
to create a font descriptor.
Say you have a terminal application,
and terminal applications typically
deal with monospace fonts,
and you want to provide an interface for
users to pick what font to use in the
case where we need to display some bold
characters in the terminal application.
So, you want to create a font
descriptor that basically says,
"Give me all the fonts that can be
monospaced and can be bold." So,
the way to create a font descriptor
is first you create your list,
or let's say dictionary of attributes.
And in this case,
the dictionary of attributes will only
have one element that we care about,
and that's a traits attribute.
The traits attribute in itself is
another dictionary of attributes,
and the only attribute
that we care about,
or trait that we care about,
is the subject.
Symbolic trait.
And that, in this case,
is a bold and monospace.
So, once we have our dictionary
defining what we want,
we can create the font
descriptor with it.
Now, at this time,
we've just created the font descriptor.
We haven't resolved the font descriptor.
If, to make an analogy with SQL,
or SQLite to be precise,
at this point in time it would
be like if you had executed
the SQL prepare statement.
You haven't executed.
You haven't solved it.
So, let's say you just want to have one
font that can be monospaced and bold.
Well, you can get a direct font reference
using the create with font descriptor.
And now the system will
get you one reference,
one font that can handle
both of these attributes.
But like in the example I said,
you want to provide a list
for your users to pick.
You can do the same and resolve it
in a way that it gives you a list of
fonts that can handle both attributes.
And you can use the create matching
font descriptors to do that.
It will give you an array of font
descriptors that can handle both
the monospace and bold in this case.
Then font descriptors is the
way we recommend that you use
to store your font references.
And the reason being, as you can see,
is the font descriptor
is a list of attributes,
if you will,
that describe what font you want to use.
So, once you have the list,
the best way is to grab this
list and serialize it to this.
So, if you're starting from a font,
you can always get the best
descriptor for that font.
So,
you call the copy font descriptor API.
Once you have your descriptor,
you can copy the dictionary of
attributes for that descriptor.
Now, once you have this dictionary,
you can use any number of
APIs to serialize or flatten
this data out to this.
Here, I'm showing you a core foundation.
You can see that this is a
foundation API that gets -- that
flattens it out as XML data.
So, you can write this out to this.
Now, font substitution, like I said,
is free in Core Text.
And it's not only free,
it's a pretty sophisticated
font substitution engine.
It's not quite lame to say, okay,
my font is missing this glyph,
just give me any other font
out there that has this glyph.
No, it is language-specific.
It takes into account
precedence order of fonts.
It takes into account traits.
So if you're dealing with a bold font,
it's going to give you another bold font.
It looks into things like
compression ratio of the font.
So if a font is condensed,
it's going to look for another
font that has similar features.
So it tries very,
very hard to come up with a font
that looks very similar to the base
font that you have started with.
Now, it is on by default,
so if you want to override it, as I said,
you can do so by passing
your own list of,
your own cascade list when
you create the descriptor,
and you use the attribute you
use as a font cascade list
attribute to define your own list.
Now,
if you're dealing with Quartz directly,
and like I said before,
Quartz has no idea how to
pick up the right font to,
doesn't know how to pick the right
font to render any appropriate text,
you can come back to Core Text and
Core Text has an API,
the CT font create for string API,
that given a range of text,
it'll tell you the best
font to render the set text.
Now,
new for OS X Leopard is font management.
Core Text will now handle all the
font management for the system.
This replaces legacy functionality
in another text system.
It provides all the features
that the old legacy system had,
plus some added functionality that
you developers have been requesting.
Now, this is not documented elsewhere.
The only place that we have any
documentation on this is in the header.
You can find it in the
Core Text framework in the headers,
ctfontmanager.h.
So this is the perfect time for you,
if you're interested in font management,
to peruse what's in the header
and give us any feedback.
But now I'll talk about the new things
that we provide with font management.
The first thing is registration APIs.
Now, what does it mean to register
a font in the system?
Registering a font means that any of the
font creation APIs that I just showed you
will be able to get access to that font.
Or, it means that a user will be able
to see this font in the font picker,
for example.
Okay?
So, there are different ways for
you to make fonts available.
You can make your fonts available
only to your own process.
For that, you use the scope process.
You can make the font available
to every process in the system.
And for that, you use the scope user.
And the last one is the same.
It makes the font available for
every process in the system.
But once the user logs out or reboots,
the system forgets about that font.
That's the scope session.
So, there are two APIs to register fonts.
The fonts for URL and fonts for URLs.
The first one takes a font reference.
Or, a font reference.
I should say.
And the scope.
The second one takes an array
of font file references.
And the scope.
Every time a font is
registered with the system,
the system will notify the processes
that something has changed.
So you can register with the
distributed notification manager
to listen to these notifications.
And this is the string that you would
use to register for notifications.
Now, as I showed you,
there are two ways to register fonts.
Every single time a font is registered,
a notification is sent out.
However, if you use the second
API that I just showed you,
the Fonts for URL,
only a single notification will be
sent out when all the fonts that you
pass in the array have been registered.
Obviously,
there are similar APIs to unregister
the fonts with similar names.
Finally,
there is a way for you to enable and
disable the font descriptors that are
available from each one of the APIs,
typically something that font
management applications will like to do.
Now, we have new enumeration APIs.
Unlike the old legacy APIs,
now you get all the fonts at once.
No need to create an iterator.
And also,
the nice thing about this enumeration
APIs is that the list of font names
that you get is sorted in the same order
that the font panel has them sorted,
that the system has them sorted.
Now, let's say that you have your
own family names that are not
registered with the system,
and you want to present them
to the user in the same order
fashion that the system provides.
You can use the
Compare Font Families API to
do just that.
There is an API that enumerates
all the font files that are
registered with the system,
something that font management
applications typically want to do.
And this last one, it's a neat API.
They create font descriptors from URL.
It enumerates all the descriptors
that a font file can handle.
Now,
this is typically something that font
management application might want to use,
but
It's also neat.
You might want to use this
API for your own applications.
The reason is because this is how you
can use a font in your application and
hide it from the rest of the system,
your own private registration.
Basically,
you pass it in an arbitrary font file.
It gives you the font
descriptors that it can handle,
and you hold on to
those font descriptors,
and you can pass those font
descriptors to Core Text and
Cocoa APIs to render text with them.
If another framework tries to
create or look up for that font,
it won't find it because it hasn't
been registered with the system.
Finally,
we have Auto Activation Services.
This is a new API.
It's a mouthful.
"Ct Font Manager.
Create Font Request.
Run Loop Source." And this is an
API that you would use if you want to
implement your own auto activation.
Notice it takes the new Blocks
API to implement callbacks.
And I must warn you,
this API is on the developer Snow Leopard
seed that you received in the conference,
but it's not currently active.
So just look at it in the
header and provide us any
feedback that you might have.
Now, like I said, since Mac OS X Leopard,
auto-activation is on by default.
And there are ways for you to control the
auto-activation features of the system.
This is how you go about it.
You can enable it, disable it,
or prompt the user before the
auto-activation can take place.
And you use this API,
the Set Auto-Activation Setting API.
It takes two parameters,
a bundle identifier and a setting.
The bundle identifier, typically,
you will pass to your own apps
bundle identifier and the settings
will only apply to your own app.
But if you want to turn it
off for the whole system,
you use the CT font manager bundle
identifier string or identifier to
apply the setting to the whole system.
Now, let's get to the exciting part
about Core Text and that's
its layout capabilities,
the Unicode Text layout capabilities.
So, like I said, the Core Text takes for
input an attributed string,
so your base string and a set
of attributes that define it.
And the first thing that happens is
you deal with two objects that do
all the heavy lifting in Core Text.
These are the frame setter
and the type setter.
The Frame Setter basically
holds all the text,
and it works in conjunction
with the Type Setter to
basically position the glyphs,
suggest lines,
and look at paragraph settings to
just properly lay out the text.
So how do you go about drawing them?
It is quite simple using Core Text.
There's a couple ways.
You can use a line object or
a frame object or a glyph run.
The line object is the simplest way.
You just create a line object
from an attributed string.
It internally creates a Type Setter,
and it is ready to draw.
Before you draw, you can apply a set of
calls to it to measure it,
truncate it, adjust it, in whatever way.
Now, you can also,
instead of drawing a line,
you can draw paragraphs,
and that's using a frame.
And I'll describe that in the next slide.
And finally,
if you're dealing with Core Graphics or
Quartz directly to lay out your glyphs,
you have access to the
position glyph runs.
So this is one way that you
can... use Core Text and Quartz
to lay out your text directly.
So, let me give you an example of
what you would typically do if
you want to lay out a paragraph.
First,
you start with your attributed string.
And the first thing you do is
create a frame setter object.
The only input to the frame setter
object is your attributed string.
It internally creates a Type Setter
to help it do all its layout.
Next, you define a CG path, the shape,
which, by the way,
we only support rectangles,
that defines where you
want to lay out your text.
So, at this point in time,
once it has the rectangle,
the frame setter and the
Type Setter go to work and start
doing the appropriate layout.
The Type Setter positions the glyphs,
does the glyph runs,
suggests the line breaks,
positions all the lines,
all taking into account the attributes
that you pass and the attributed
string to the Find Paragraph settings,
and also takes a look at, you know, say,
the directionality of the text.
Now, let's say that you,
this frame did not fit all the
text that you wanted to draw.
Well, at that point in time,
you can use the same frame setter object,
give it another rectangle,
and the process will start all
over again within the frame
setter and the Type Setter to
lay out the remaining text.
Thus, you can chain your frames,
and you can repeat this process
until you exhaust the text.
So, how do you go about coding this?
Let's first start with
the attributed string.
Like I said, the attributed string is
first your base string.
Here, up on the slide,
I have what I would call
a hard coding of a string.
It's using the CFSCR macro,
and it just takes a Unicode string.
But typically,
you wouldn't be hard coding strings into
your apps unless it's for debugging.
So, typically,
you want to get a localized string.
So, here, this API, or this string,
is a local string.
This macro shows you how to get
an appropriate localized string.
So, once you have your base string,
next thing is you want to define
the set of attributes that you
want to apply to this string.
We definitely want a font,
so I'll pick Lucid Grunt 96.
And we'll just keep it simple.
That's the only attribute that
we're going to apply to the text,
but you can well imagine that
you can define other things,
just such as alignment, line spacing,
and so forth, different paragraph styles.
So, now, we're going to create our text.
And we're going to create our dictionary,
which will have all the
attributes that we need.
Once again, it's a pretty simple one.
It's only the font.
So, once we have our dictionary
and our base string,
we can create our attributed string.
So, once we have this attributed string,
it's quite simple to draw with Core Text.
In this example,
we're just going to draw a line,
a simple label.
So, simple call,
create with attributed string,
create line with attributed string, and
At this point,
once the line object is created,
it has internally a typesetter that has
layered all the text in the proper way,
it is ready to draw.
Now, one thing that...
The first thing that you should
always do before you draw any text
is make sure that your text matrix
and your context is set up properly.
You don't know how many times
this bites people and they say,
"Oh, why is my text not drawing?" Well,
somebody has modified the text
matrix from underneath you.
So, at this point, like I said,
the line object is ready to draw,
but you can make any number of
other calls in Core Text that
allow you to manipulate the line.
You might want to truncate the line,
for example.
If not, you just position your line
and you're ready to draw.
Just draw it.
Now, drawing frames.
Simple again.
You're starting with the
same attributed string.
The only other thing that you need now is
[Transcript missing]
So the first thing you do is
you create a framesetter object.
It only takes an attributed string.
Next,
once you have your Framestarter object,
you pass it in the shape,
the rectangle path that you want to use,
and the range of text
that you want to lay out.
In this case,
I'm saying just the whole text.
Once again, at this point,
you can set up your text matrix,
or make sure your text
matrix is set up properly.
And also, there are a lot of calls in
Core Text that can help you adjust
the layout that we've suggested.
Once you've done that,
you're ready to draw.
So now, let me invite up to the stage
Nathan Taylor so he can give you
a demo of how to use Core Text.
Thank you, Julio.
I've got a couple short
demos to show you today.
I'm going to show you one right now.
It gives Julio a chance
to catch his breath.
And this demo is going to show
you drawing of text as Julio
showed with Core Text in frames.
And it's in a simple Cocoa application.
So let me show you the
application real quick.
All right.
It's launched.
You don't see anything.
I'm going to open up a document.
Let's make the window a
little bit bigger here.
You can see that the
text flows automatically,
and I've got it wired up
so that if we click it,
add frames.
So I've got it now in three columns,
and you can see it flow to
the columns as I resize it.
And as you can see,
Core Text handles pretty
much all the same styles that
you can get out of TextEdit.
We have multiple style text,
multi-language text,
multiple fonts in this document.
And Core Text handles it all
within a single attributed string.
Now, let me show you how we
got this attributed string
and how we drew the text.
So this application is an
NSDocument-based application,
and as such, we have NSDocument subclass,
myDocument, and all we really did is take
the boilerplate code and set it
up to when reading from a URL to
create our attributed string.
So read URL of type error
creates our attributed string,
and NSDocument handles the open
dialogue and everything we need for us.
Once we have this attributed string,
we then can pass it
to our Core Text view,
which does the drawing.
As you can see, we have drawRect here,
and this gets the graphics port and
then initializes the frame setter,
and so I'll show you where
we create it down here.
CTFrameSetter,
create with attributed string.
We get our attribute string,
create a frame setter,
and then we create our columns.
Let's take a look at those.
As Julio said, we start by getting
our column rectangles,
creating our column rectangles,
and then for each rectangle,
we create a path, add the rectangle,
and insert it to our array.
And then this is going to be passed back,
and we'll use that to-- oops,
let me close this here.
In DrawRect,
once we have our column paths,
we're gonna iterate over each path,
create a frame from the
path and the frame setter,
and draw each frame.
It's really straightforward to draw
text in frame paragraph styles,
and Core Text handles all the typical
paragraph styles that you would get
from NS TextView or--and similar.
So with that,
I will give the stage back over to
Julio so he can tell you about Cocoa.
Thanks, Nathan.
So you can see how easy it
is to use Core Text to render
paragraphs or simple lines.
But the power of Core Text is in
the adjustments that you can make.
And I invite you to go online and
check out the documentation of
Core Text so you can see all the
power that Core Text provides for you.
By the way,
this is the only place where you
can find documentation of Core Text.
And at the end of the slides,
I'll provide you a link where
you can go get the information.
Now, Core Text, much like Quartz,
is a building block in
our text architecture.
So,
If you're doing low-level text layout,
all you need to do is text layout.
And especially if you just,
you have to confine yourself to
doing procedural programming,
Core Text is the place to be.
Now,
if you're dealing with text in general,
well, you wanna be,
this is where you wanna be.
You wanna be in Cocoa.
And the reason is,
you just get the whole enchilada.
When you're dealing with text, up to now,
we've just been talking about
drawing glyphs and laying out text.
But text is more than that.
Our users expect text
to be more than that.
You need a way to actually be
able to interface with your user.
You need to be able to
handle input of text.
The users expect you to handle
things such as file formats,
be able to read and write 'em.
So Cocoa does this for you,
and it basically handles most of it for
you so you don't have to worry about it.
Like the rest of the Cocoa system,
Cocoa Text is built on the
Model-View-Controller paradigm.
So the model would be your storage,
your fonts, your paragraphs that
you want to manipulate.
The controller would
be your layout manager,
the glyph setter, the type setter.
Notice the keen resemblance on
the classes to what Core Text has
because Coco's layout engine
is built on top of Core Text.
And finally, View.
There are many different View classes,
and this is basically where the
added value to our users is for text.
It does all the input.
It does all the dirty work that the
users expect your application to handle.
So fonts in Cocoa,
the font system in Cocoa is built
on top of Core Text as well.
Its type,
as I showed you in a previous slide,
are toll-free bridge
with the Core Text types,
so you can use them interchangeably,
and you can expect to be able to
create them in a similar fashion,
only that you have the advantage
of you dealing with Objective-C.
Now, Cocoa also deals or has a feature
called the font collections.
And collections are groups of fonts,
if you will,
that you as an application developer
can provide for your users to use,
or they can create these collections
by themselves using the font panel,
which is the user interface
for the font system.
And I'll show you that later.
Now, at the heart of the font system
in Cocoa is the font manager.
Let's not confuse the Cocoa font
manager with the Core Text font manager.
The Core Text font manager manages
all the font files in the system.
The Cocoa font manager makes fonts,
font descriptors,
font collections available to the user,
manages those font collections.
It also manages the font panel,
and it provides font conversion APIs.
If we were to apply the
Model View Controller to
the fonts in Cocoa,
your model would be the fonts,
the descriptors, the collections.
The controller would be the
The font manager and the
view would be the font panel.
So, the font panel is the standard UI in
Mac OS X for users to pick fonts.
It has a built-in collection
font manager for the user,
so that's where users can actually
modify collections that are default
in the system that you might have
created and provided for them or
that they create on their own.
But the font manager also provides
the user the ability to create,
to specify a lot of
things about the fonts,
not just what font to use and what size,
but apply all sorts of
different text effects.
They can specify the opacity,
they can specify a color.
In essence,
what the user is doing here for us is
creating a font descriptor for us to use.
Also, the font panel gives you
access to the typography panel,
which gives users access to high-end
typography features of the font.
Finally,
the font panel is very customizable,
both by the user and the developer.
The user,
by being able to resize the font
panel or hide things from the font
panel to get up on the screen whatever
pieces of the font panel that they
want to use for their workflow.
But as a developer,
you can create also accessory views that
can be used inside of the font panel.
So,
if you're dealing with text in Cocoa and
you want to draw it or edit it,
which classes, where should you go?
If you're just drawing
small pieces of text,
drawing labels,
nothing beats Cocoa for that.
You can have an NSString or
an NSAttributedString and
tell it to draw itself.
No need to create another
object or try to truncate stuff.
It will do it automatically for you.
If you're handling small pieces
of text that you want to edit,
you can use the NSTextField
or there are other controls
that are similar in fashion.
Now,
when you want to deal with paragraphs,
largest pieces of text,
you want to be in the
NSTextView or use the NSTextView.
And finally, like I said,
Cocoa can handle every single
detail of the text for you.
But if you require precise control
of how the text is to be laid out,
you can do it within Cocoa.
You can go directly
to the Layout Manager.
It builds on top of Core Text.
So all the functionality
you have in Core Text,
you can also find inside of
the Layout Manager in Cocoa.
Now, like Core Text,
Cocoa prefers to deal with attributed
string for drawing its text.
And the neat thing about dealing with
attributed strings in Cocoa is that you
can get attributed strings very easily.
As Nathan showed you on his demo,
he created his attributed string using
an RTF document to get a string from.
He didn't have to go and
code an attributed string
like I did a few slides ago.
So, up on the screen shows you some of
the font formats that you can create
an attributed string easily from.
But the strings APIs also
provide a way for you,
so if you have a format
that it doesn't know about,
you can provide a filter service
so that it converts that format
into an attributed string.
Now, string drawing, again,
quite easy with Cocoa.
If you have an NSString or
an NSAttributedString,
there are different methods
that you can use to draw itself.
Here are a couple of examples.
The second one,
the bounding rect with size, for example,
if you specify a bounding rect,
it will draw the string in there
and it will automatically apply any
truncation that needs to be applied.
No reason for you to create a
different object to handle this.
Now, it is quite easy,
and one of the things that I must
caution you when using the string APIs is
that anything that is in the context,
in the graphics context,
is overridden by what you
supply in the attributed string.
So if your context was set to use Optima,
say, but your attributed string says
that it wants to use Arial,
it will draw using Arial.
It will draw using every
single attribute that you had.
Now, if you're dealing with a
string which has no attributes,
what Cocoa will do is will use
the default font for the system,
which is Helvetica, to draw.
Now, this class is sort of the nice
feature for you as a developer
because what this class is,
the NS TextView class,
is essentially a very
powerful basic word processor,
if you will.
If you're familiar with
the TextEdit application,
anything that the TextEdit
application can do,
the NS TextView can do.
By the way,
for those of you that don't know,
you can find the source code to the
TextEdit application in the examples
directory in developer examples Cocoa.
All the source code for the
TextEdit application is there.
Now,
NS TextView does all the heavy lifting.
It does all your input.
It manages or handles all the input
managers for different languages.
It does all your cut, cut and paste,
manages undo, drag and drop.
It handles all the complex formatting.
So, if you want to have lists, tables,
rulers, if you want to have attachments,
you want to put some media into
it such as a movie or a graphic,
it handles that for you.
It also has some form of detection
like link URL detection and provides
tool tips to those links automatically.
A lot of things that users come to expect
for you to handle when dealing with text.
It also has utilities such as spell
checking and grammar checking built in.
Now, new in Snow Leopard,
some new features for NS TextView.
Again, I want to caution you that
these are available in the seed,
in the headers,
but they're not active in the seed.
So, you won't be able to take
advantage of them right away.
The first one is data detectors.
So,
what it will do is it will look at your
text and it will be able to identify
pieces of text such as email addresses,
normal addresses.
And what you can expect
to happen is that we will,
the Cocoa text system will be
able to hook up automatically
with the appropriate framework,
say the address book,
so that users can directly add
contacts to their address book.
It will also have auto-correction
for misspelled text,
smart dashes, and text replacement.
So you can imagine,
like I show in this example,
you're typing open paren, C,
and close paren, and it'll turn that
into a copyright sign.
Something useful for our users
that don't know how to go about
using the option keys or the nice
hidden keyboard control panel.
So with that, Nathan,
we'll give you a demo on use in Cocoa.
So I'm going to show you the
second of my two demos here.
And again, this is drawing with
Core Text in a Cocoa application.
If you were at last year's
hands-on Core Text talk,
you may have recognized this application.
It's the Core Text ArcView.
But I've translated it from
a Carbon application into a
Cocoa document-based application.
And this application draws
text on an arc using Core Text,
but interfaces through the
standard Cocoa mechanism with
the font panel and the UI.
So I have, you know, live update.
and I can control the font styles
from some check boxes here.
And it respects what the
font's capabilities are,
which is something that
you should do with your UI.
So let me open up the font panel.
And we can see we have DDoS select,
and it only has italic and bold faces.
So if I choose bold, I get bold,
and italic, italic, but I can't do bold,
italic.
So let me bring up a new window,
and I'll change the font
in this window to Cochin,
where we can now do bold and italic
and go back with the font panel.
And so what I will show you in the
code is how we did the drawing,
but more importantly,
how I interacted with the
font panel and other controls.
Because if you have your own custom
view that you want to display a font,
you're going to want to be
able to support multiple fonts,
and this may be of interest to you.
So let's take a look at the project.
Here we go.
And I'm going to first start
off by giving you a quick
overview of the drawing.
This is the Core Text Arc view.
It does all the drawing here in DrawRect,
and it's pretty straightforward.
I have an attributed string,
which I create a line from.
I then process the line,
extracting glyph information.
I create my arc.
And then through mathematical
processes and transforms,
I draw each glyph along the
line with a CT run draw.
Let me go down and just quickly
show you that right here.
So let's take a look at how we
interface with the font panel and the
user interface and deal with fonts.
So the first thing I want
to show you is when--
The font panel changes the font.
The message is sent to the
first responder to change font,
which I have selected here.
And my document, my NSDocument subclass,
is the Windows delegate.
So it eventually comes to my document.
Here's where I handle it.
I will convert the font
from the font panel,
which is the sender,
using the old font and assign it
back to the ArcView as the new font.
And then I'm going to update my display,
which is probably what you'll need to do.
When I switch windows,
toggle between windows,
what I do is I tell the font
manager that this window,
this controller is the
new target for events.
And I'm going to set the font
for the font panel so that the
font panel is updated live as the
user switches between windows.
So if you noticed,
the checkboxes were kind
of respecting the font.
And what they did is they
looked at the font that we had,
looked at what it was capable of,
and then would set their
state respectively.
So first let's look at what we did
when I clicked the bold checkbox.
This made a font bold.
And what I'm doing here in toggle
bold is using the NSFontManager to
convert the font to have the trait or,
when I'm unchecking it,
to not have the trait.
And I'm asking for the bold trait here.
Now, how did I determine whether this
should be enabled or not is...
I implemented an NSFont category method.
You can use however you want.
CanToggleTrait.
And what this does is it attempts
to toggle the trait and then checks,
you know, so I convert the font again,
and then I take my test
font and I'm going to take a
look at its symbolic traits,
compare it to the
desired symbolic traits,
and make sure that it is only
different by my desired trait.
At the end, that's how we can control
the user interface elements,
you know, menu items, check boxes,
if we want to have specific
font controls so that they stay
in sync with the font panel.
If you're curious about how you can
manipulate text in Cocoa directly,
I want to point you to
the Circle View example.
It's in Developer, Examples, App Kit.
CircleView.
And this draws text on
a circle using Cocoa.
So with that, I'll give the stage back to
Julio so he can finish up.
Thanks, Nathan.
So that sort of concludes what
I wanted to talk to you about,
the high-level view of the tech system.
So before I'm done,
I want to leave you with some
pointers that you might need while
you're developing for Mac OS X.
So the first has to do with storage.
Typically,
all our strings are based on Unicode,
and definitely that's what we recommend,
that you store all your documents as,
and some, you know,
with Unicode as some form.
So if you look at the
NSString APIs in Cocoa,
there are various calls that you can have
in there or that you have available to
you that do a lot of the work for you.
First, if you're reading from it,
look-- if you know that you're
dealing with files that you might be
working with other systems that might
have a different representation,
say a byte order or
Unicode decomposition,
look for APIs such as this one,
create external representation,
and these are APIs that will handle
all these automatically for you.
Now, when you go store fonts,
like I said before,
store the font descriptor attributes.
Don't store a font reference.
The reason being is this way you're
guaranteed that you have all the
attributes that the user was actually
using when displaying the font.
Like Nathan showed you,
typically the way the UI,
for the user to create font references,
is using the font panel.
And the font panel has many
ways for the user to tinker with
the representation of the font.
So by you getting the descriptor,
you get every single
one of those attributes,
and it's easy to flatten them out.
In fact, if you use Cocoa,
Cocoa has some nice
serialization APIs for you.
And finally, if you're just storing
plain text documents,
starting in Leopard,
we could tag plain text in there.
So if you look at the NSString APIs,
the write to file API, I believe,
will allow you to,
will automatically tag the
document with the right encoding.
Core Text,
if you need to be in this space,
you're in procedural programming,
you're doing procedural programming,
and you're laying out your text,
I want to encourage you
to use the right objects.
If you're dealing with paragraphs,
use a frame setter.
You could do paragraphs in any
other ways because Core Text has
many APIs that give you control.
But we encourage you to use the APIs that
are designed for the particular task.
We use the objects,
especially the typesetter
and the framesetter.
These are the objects
that do the heavy lifting,
all the layout.
So hold on to them as long as possible.
And finally,
The text matrix,
setting up the text matrix.
I can't mention this enough.
This, I'm sure if you're new,
it will bite you at some point.
As soon as you don't
see text on your screen,
that's the first thing that
you should come to mind.
I didn't set up my text matrix.
So do that.
And finally, don't make any character
to glyph assumptions.
Let the layout engine,
let Core Text handle that
for you using its APIs.
And Cocoa.
It is our recommended layer or API of
choice if you're dealing with text.
Reason being is because it handles
every single aspect of text for you.
It is built on top of
Quartz and Core Text,
so it has all the capabilities
of these layers and more.
So unless you have some particular needs,
such as doing procedural programming,
you should be in the Cocoa space.
So just a little reminder of what you
need to look for in for text in Cocoa.
If you're doing some custom
drawing and you just want
to display some small label,
you might want to use an
NSText field because with that you
get text editing for free as well.
If you need any text editing and
you're just looking for speed,
well, use these string APIs for that.
And again, if you want to do some
really customized layout,
you need some precise measurements,
you always have access
to the Layout Manager.
And finally, for text input,
use the NSText view or
an editable control.
And this is one area that we recommend
that you don't typically override.
The reason being is once you
start writing text editing,
it opens up all sorts of
kind of worms for you.
And basically, you might break existing
features that we have.
Or in the future,
if we come up with some new features,
you might not be able
to take advantage of.
So don't reinvent the wheel
when it comes to text.
to text input.
And finally, fonts.
Fonts should be quite simple to use,
and they are for the most part,
but we do provide a lot of flexibility
in OS X when it comes to fonts.
And the first thing that hits our
users is the precedence order.
So as you saw before in this slide,
there are many places where
users can install fonts or
even make them available.
So the lowest precedent, surprisingly,
is the system location.
And the highest precedent
is the application.
By the way,
auto-activated fonts have the same
precedence as application fonts.
So the closer you are to the user,
the higher the precedence.
Typically,
where users run into trouble is when
they go in and install a font that
overwrites one of the system fonts or
your application fonts that you ship.
Unfortunately, there is not much that
we can do about that.
But you as an application developer,
especially if you're installing fonts,
there is something that you
at least need to be aware of.
If you have an installer
application to install fonts,
your application must look first to see
if any fonts that you're about to install
are going to overwrite either an older
version or a newer version of the font.
If you don't do this,
you're just asking yourself for
trouble for you and your users.
Creating font references.
I alluded to this earlier.
If you are dealing with font
family names and weights,
please create a font descriptor.
Do not attempt to create a font
from a direct font reference
using a font family name.
It's a performance issue.
On the same performance issue, again,
font names are case sensitive.
Don't use the correct font name.
The reason being is, like I said,
since OS X Leopard,
auto-activation is on by default.
If you pass the wrong font name,
first we're going to look in our...
database, if you will,
of fonts that are registered,
look for that font.
If it's not there,
we're going to dig through the
fonts and try to find them.
And even if we can't find them there,
then we're going to go try
to hit Spotlight or hit the
third-party font management
utility to try to find that font.
We really want to provide a good user
experience for our users and have the
fonts available whenever they are.
So once again,
make sure you use the proper font names.
That way,
you don't get this performance hit.
And finally, font substitution.
Font substitution is great for
us developers and for our users.
We don't have to worry
about what font to use.
However, you can abuse it.
And the way you can abuse it is, say,
you have your application and you
specify a font that you want to use,
and font substitution kicks in
and picks up a glyph that is not
on the font that you specified.
And typically,
this is the case for developers when they
want to use a font that they want to use.
So if you want to use some symbol or
dingbat to show on their user interface,
well, be aware,
the user can override your fonts.
So if they override your fonts,
they can potentially override
the font substitution mechanism.
So if you want a glyph to
be displayed on the screen,
make sure that you specify
that font that uses that glyph.
Otherwise,
if you depend on font substitution,
you're going to be out of luck.
So that concludes my talk.
If you want to leave,
I want to point at you this link
at the bottom where you can get all
information about text and fonts.
This is the only place where you're
going to find core text documentation
other than on the headers.
There will be some sessions
later on today related to text,
internationalizing your software,
and text input on the iPhone.
And luckily for you guys,
you're going to be able to hit
us with questions multiple times.
So if you have any questions,
please feel free to reach out to us.
There's three labs where you'll
be able to find some of us,
or if not most of us.
Later on this afternoon,
some of us will be there at
the internationalization lab.
Tomorrow, there'll be a Cocoa open lab
where Cocoa engineers will
be there to help answer any
questions you have with Cocoa text.
And they might even be able to help you
with some core text questions as well.
And then on Friday,
we'll have a core text lab where you'll
be able to hit us for core text questions
or cords or even Cocoa text questions.